hello
and welcome to this month's night sky
news with me
astrophysicist dr becky smedhurst this
is the series where we take a look at
what to look out for in the night sky
in the next coming weeks and we chat
about what's been happening in space
news
in the past month including this month
for october
the first planet detected in another
galaxy outside the milky way
and a supermassive black hole that
spaghettified
a star so excited to chat about that one
seriously
anyway any research paper i mentioned in
the video will be linked in the video
description
below and i've got timestamps if you
want to skip ahead to any specific
story so without any further ado let's
kick this off and start
by looking up
so the next few weeks are all about
meteor showers we've just had
the peak of the orionis meteor shower so
those are still hanging around in the
sky at the minute
then in early november you've got the
peak of the torrets and then in mid
november you've got the peak of the
leonids as well so a meteor shower
happens when the earth passes through a
regional space along its orbit that
has a few bits of rocky rubble usually
left over by like a comet on its journey
around the sun and depending where that
rubble is left the meteors appear to
come from a specific place in the sky
like a constellation for example the
orionids appear to be coming from the
constellation
orion hence their name so what you want
to do with a meteor shower is look
anywhere but the constellation they're
supposed to be coming from because
they're going to be streaking away from
that point so if you're looking at the
constellation
you're not going to see them as they
streak up and over
your head so the key to me to your
showers is first of all patience because
you know those meteors every couple of
minutes or so someone or so a minute you
know it's not
sort of looking like meteos falling like
rain that only happens maybe
once a decade or so if we're lucky and
the other thing
is to lie flat as well because then
you'll see more of the sky than if
you're looking sort of craning your neck
because it's more comfortable to just
lie flat so
wrap it warm put a blanket down stare at
the sky
until you see something streak across it
and it takes your breath away
so towards meteor shower in early
november that's going to appear as if
the meteors are all coming from the
constellation of taurus which is
just above orion so you can find orion
turn away
from there in the northern hemisphere
they're going to peak around about the
11th and 12th of november
and in the southern hemisphere the peak
will be about on the
5th of november you want to look around
midnight
local time wherever you are northern or
southern hemisphere for the peak
which will be around about five meteors
an hour which isn't great to be honest
on the sort of meteor
shower scale it's only maybe about one
every 12 minutes
or so but the taurids is known for its
exceptionally
great bright fireballs so much bigger
meteors instead of being caused by
something like a speck of dust burning
up through the atmosphere
maybe you get something that's like
pebble-sized that burns up in the
atmosphere that's so
much brighter and more spectacular so if
you see something like that
in the next few weeks that's probably
what it is a sort of taurid's
fireball meteor so keep your eyes peeled
then we've got the much more impressive
leonids meteor shower peaking on the
17th of november this is both northern
and southern hemispheres again
and the peak of this meteor shower
they'll be about 10 to 15 meteors an
hour which is more like one every four
to six minutes so
much more chance of spotting them
however instead of looking around
midnight you have to look for these sort
of before
dawn which i know is not everyone's
favorite time to get up
but if you are up early then get up and
you want to face away from leo
hence leonard's the name towards the
east so face away from wherever the sky
is brightening because of the rising sun
and look for meteors uh anywhere but
there
all right so as well as meteor showers
we've also got all
five major planets visible in the night
sky at the moment wherever you are
across the globe first up we've got
venus and mercury in the east
right before dawn so look towards where
the sky is
lightning venus is the brightest thing
in the night sky after the moon so it's
a little bit difficult to
miss it should be the last thing left in
the sky
before the sunrise it should be only
thing that you should be able to see as
the sun
brightens and brightens the sky as we
get closer to sunrise
mercury however is much fainter it's
also much closer to the sun so it
doesn't rise as
high in the sky making it a little bit
more difficult to spot
the closer you are to the equator the
higher it will be for you and it will be
much easier to spot hopefully
and also the closer you are to the 10th
of november because that's when it'll
actually reach its highest point
in the sky as well so keep an eye out
for that if you can
then we have mars visible all night
rising in the east and setting
very early morning in the west looks
very bright at the moment since earth
and mars are so close together
in their orbits you know back in
mid-october they sort of passed that
closest point of approach because earth
and mars orbits aren't circular they're
sort of oval shaped so there is a place
where they come a little bit closer
together
mars gets incredibly bright in our sky
brighter even than jupiter so it's
very easy to spot especially with its
very distinctive sort of rusty red
colour
as well speaking of jupiter that's also
visible in the night sky at the moment
in a beautiful little pair
with saturn in the south in the evening
they usually set sort of around
midnight maybe before that depending on
where you are in the world
they're very distinctive at the minute
because they're in that pair they're
some of the first things to appear
in the night sky after the sun has set
as well because they're so much brighter
than all the fainter
stars and because jupiter is one of the
brightest things it's difficult to
mistake
for anything else especially just after
sunset and it makes spotting saturn
really easy too because once you found
jupiter it's like oh and there's saturn
next to it with its
distinctive sort of like yellowish tinge
if you're in a city it's probably even
going to be easier to pick out jupiter
and saturn because
the light pollution will wash out all
the fainter stars in the background
leaving probably just the planets
looking very very bright and beautiful
in your sky however if you're still
not sure that what you're looking at is
what you think it is then i've got a
couple of tips for you so tonight
this evening the 22nd of october
a half moon is gonna be right in the
middle of jupiter and saturn and then
by tomorrow on friday it will have moved
just
past sand but either way if you can find
the moon tonight or tomorrow then you
should be able to pick out jupiter and
saturn in their pair
very close to it similarly on the 29th
to 30th of october you can have an
almost
full moon very close to mars in the sky
so you can find
the full moon you know that the reddish
bright thing next to it
is mars they'll be moving across the sky
together all night so it doesn't matter
what time
you look for this perhaps you might be
doing some early trick or treating
and it'll be a fun sort of spooky thing
to look for in the sky then on the 12th
to the 13th in november
i couldn't skip out the fact that we're
gonna have a toenail moon or a crescent
moon because i'm
weird and i call it a toenail moon right
next to venus and mercury in the very
early morning sky just before dawn it
really is one of my
favorite pairings to look for in the sky
because the moon is so beautiful when
it's a toenail and venus is
so wonderfully bright as well they just
look so good together so if you manage
to capture
a picture of that pairing or a picture
of any of the pairings i've talked about
or any meteor showers
as well please do send them my way on
social media because i love love love
to see them but now we need to talk
about
the space news that's been happening in
the past month
all right so as usual there are far too
many things for us to talk about for one
video
so here we're going to be keeping the
focus on black holes and high energy
stuff whereas over on my instagram
stories and on my youtube stories now
too
for all of you who don't have instagram
we're going to be keeping more of an
astrobiology focus i'm going to be
chatting about the potential discovery
of lakes
on mars but then also the discovery of
glycine
on venus glycine is uh one of the most
basic amino acids which are the building
blocks for life
so that was a really intriguing
discovery
especially off the back of the
announcement of the detection of
phosphine on venus from last month which
talked about in last month's night sky
news if you haven't checked that out yet
so if you're interested in hearing about
that head over to my instagram or my
youtube stories they should be going up
live
after this video goes up but here for
now
first of all i want to talk about the
potential discovery of
a planet not in our not a star in our
own galaxy the milky way
but orbiting a star in another galaxy so
in the past 25 years we've seen our
knowledge of
other planets not in our solar system
but orbiting other stars in the milky
way
go from one in 1995
to over 5 000 in 2020
but all of those have been found
orbiting stars in
our own milky way and they were found
either by
taking a direct image of that star and
blocking out the light from the stars
that you could just get the light
from the planet or watching a lot of
stars and waiting to see if any of their
brightness is dipped because a planet
passed in front of them
from our perspective but what about if
we wanted to detect an
extra galactic planet so a planet in
orbit around a star in another galaxy
entirely
it's very likely that they exist since
you know we found so many planets around
stars sort of in the general vicinity
around the sun
it's just proving that they're there is
so difficult because we can't use the
same methods that we do to find planets
in the milky way because
looking for changes in brightness as a
planet dips in front of its star at that
distance they're just
too faint to see but what if we could
use something like x-rays
instead x-rays are incredibly energetic
the objects that produce them
are so so so bright we can see them
at much further distances and they're
much rarer as well so you can
much more easily pick them out
from the background of a hundred billion
stars in this other galaxy
much easier to pick out on x-ray source
than it is to pick out a single star
that's exactly what de stefano and
collaborators did this month
with an x-ray source in the whirlpool
galaxy messier 51 it's a very famous
spiral galaxy it's about 23 million
light years away and this x-ray source
is 1
million times brighter than the sun
it's what we call an x-ray binary it's
either a neutron star or a black hole
in one of the two in orbit around
another
normal star and essentially what the
neutron star the black hole is doing is
stealing mata from the normal star to
add to their own mass and that
essentially happens
they drag the mass off the normal star
and it ends up spiraling
around the neutron star or the black
hole and essentially what happens to
that hydrogen gas that matter is that it
starts to
heat up it actually gets superheated due
to how fast it's actually orbiting
around the neutron star of the black
hole
and it starts to glow in x-rays
now the region that those x-rays come
from is actually incredibly incredibly
small think about it a neutron star the
same mass as the sun
is actually only about the size of a
small city
so the glowing material that's orbiting
around it
is also only going to be quite small
smaller than your average planet
which means that if a planet is in orbit
around this binary star system
that used to be probably just two normal
stars and one of those went supernova to
give you a neutron star or a black hole
if you've got a planet in orbit around
that and it happens to pass from our
perspective and our line of sight
in front of that x-ray source then it's
big enough to
completely block out all the x-rays
which doesn't happen when we look in
optical light for example if you have
like in our own galaxy the milky way
when we look for planets if you have a
planet
pass in front of a star it's not big
enough to block out all the stars light
so we only see a dip in brightness of
sort of
a fraction of a percent whereas if we
were looking at this x-ray source in
another galaxy
and a planet bigger than it passed in
front of it we would see the x-ray
brightness drop from 100
to nothing as the planet passed in front
of it making it
much easier to spot so d stervano and
collaborators observed this x-ray source
m51 uls
one for 47 hours straight
and in that time luckily saw the x-ray
light
from it completely drop to zero
for about 20 to 30 minutes you can see
that here in this plot of the count of
the number of x-ray photons they've
detected on that y-axis
against time on the x-axis you can also
clearly see it in this x-ray image of
m51
before and then also during when that
x-ray source completely disappears
so essentially that x-ray light has been
eclipsed by
something some object or other and the
question is what is that object
is it a planet or is it something like a
white dwarf star which is what will
happen
sort of be left over when the sun runs
out of fuel is it
something like a brown dwarf which is
kind of like a failed
star or a red dwarf which is sort of a
star that never really got off the
ground
very very well it's not very very bright
so what you can do is look at the
duration of the eclipse again and look
at
how long the eclipse lasted and from
some assumptions on the size of the
x-ray source you can then get
the size of the object that did the
eclipsing and they found that the most
likely size for this object is something
around about the size
of satin so that probably rules out
things like brown dwarfs or red dwarfs
because they tend to be much bigger than
even jupiter never mind saturn
and the authors also pointed out that
okay a white dwarf might be around about
that size but a white dwarf would also
have acted
as a gravitational lens and actually
brightened the x-rays behind it because
the white dwarf is so
dense so the authors concluded that the
most likely object that this thing
was was a planet in orbit around
this binary star system at least a
candidate
planet is what we call it because it's
not confirmed for definite that it is a
planet that's just like the most
likely hypothesis mostly working
hypothesis
at the minute but still the first
candidate
extra galactic planet still pretty cool
in my book all right moving on but
sticking with the black hole theme
let's chat about the latest news from
the event horizon collaboration famous
for the first ever image of a black hole
this one of the supermassive black hole
in messier 87. you can see what i was
talking about before the light
from the material that's been
superheated as it spirals around
the black hole now whilst we're all sat
here patiently
waiting for the same image but for our
own supermassive black hole in the
center of the milky way
which apparently is proving to be a
little bit difficult because you have to
sort of look through all of the stars
and the gas and the dust towards the
center of the milky way and
they're sort of you know very
contaminate foregrounds that you have to
remove to make sure that you're only
really detecting the light from around
the supermassive black hole
in the meantime whilst they're puzzling
on that one uh
they have released a study on the change
in the light from the material spiraling
around m87
and they have found that it is wobbling
so that eventual image they released
last year was from data taken in 2017
over a week with 10 telescopes across
the entire world
combined to give one earth-sized
telescope and that's essentially because
the bigger your telescope the less
blurry your image
before that though there was obviously a
lot of testing and
commissioning and calibration that was
done
to prove that this actually would work
so through
2009 to 2017 they actually took a lot of
these images but say with only three or
four telescopes joined to give you a
continent-sized telescope rather than an
earth-sized telescope and so they were
seeing the same thing it was obviously a
lot more blurry they couldn't actually
get the detail they needed to reveal
that structure of what we call the
accretion disk that disk of material
that's spiraling
around the black hole but once they had
the final image and they knew what that
eventual detail would look like they
could use that to infer what they would
have seen with 10 telescopes if they'd
had them back in 2009
when they'd only had three or four
telescopes to combine together they
could sort of up the detail in the image
it was sort of like the actual
equivalent
of showing enhance in a movie
what they found was that back in 2009 it
looks mostly
the same except the brightest spot on
that sort of donor of the accretion disk
moves around from 2009 to 2017.
that bright point is where the material
is hottest it's also probably the
material that's going to be accreted by
the black hole first
as well so it's very very interesting
that that
bright spot moves around on such
relatively short time scales
astronomically speaking you know it's
less than a decade only
a couple of years and we see variation
so it all feeds into this question of
how do
black holes grow is it a very
constant process where gas from that
accretion disk that's orbiting the black
hole
falls in at this constant rate or is it
more of a sporadic
process where clumps of matter will
occasionally randomly
clump off that disc and fall onto the
black hole
these observations suggest that over the
past
sort of 10 years that they'd observed
the black hole at the center of mn87 and
seen that clump of material moving
around and the disc
wobbling around that it could actually
be that sporadic process
where clumps fall off the igregion desk
and onto
the black hole but then that raises
questions of well how does that affect
the black hole itself you know i think
black holes are very poorly named
because it means that people end up
picturing them as a hole that stuff
falls into
but actually they're this huge mountain
of mata right that's just this huge
collection of mass
in this very small dense space and so
does the way that they grow with these
clumps
falling into it or whether it might be a
constant rate does that actually affect
the black hole
itself so like most studies in science i
think this answers
a few questions but it ends up raising
a hell of a lot more all right sticking
with growing
supermassive black holes but this time
one that is only
200 million light years away
from earth practically a stone's throw
so most black hole growth is from this
disc of material orbiting the black hole
that we were just talking about
but it's also possible that a star or
a clump of gas might just get a little
bit
too close and get spaghettified
by the black hole that is a real
scientific word and it also just happens
to be my
favorite word in the entirety of the
english language it's actually a really
good description
of what happens in the strong gravity
around a black hole
so say if you were falling feet first
towards a black hole and the gravity was
pulling
you down the gravity would be so much
stronger at your feet that would be
slightly closer to the black hole
that they would feel a stronger pull
than your head would slightly further
away from the black hole
and eventually what would happen out is
that you'd get stretched out into
spaghetti probably until you were just
this
spaghetti line of atoms just all the way
down
to the black hole this can also happen
to
a star and when it does happen a huge
burst of light is released on its way
down to the black hole
and this month nickel and collaborators
caught this happening
to a star around a supermassive black
hole in a very nearby galaxy it was the
closest that's ever been
detected astronomers call these tidal
disruption events or tdes and they're
pretty
rare actually what you actually observe
is just that brightening of the star as
it gets torn apart by the black hole but
it's observed across
all wavelengths to the electromagnetic
spectrum because it's such an energetic
process
you don't obviously see the gas the star
getting ripped
apart like i've been showing in these
nice simulations of
what could be happening around the black
hole so the one nickel and collaborators
have spotted was called
at2019qiz
and it was first spotted by the zwicky
transient facility a telescope which
essentially looks
for any changes in the sky night after
night after night so it spots everything
from
asteroids to supernova to these tidal
disruption events so because the ziki
transient facility managed to spot it so
quickly after it had actually happened
it meant that nickelodeon collaborators
managed to follow up very quickly with
lots of other telescopes everything
from looking at it in the optical to the
uv to the x-ray
and so using all these they could then
figure out what actually happened
in this tde and they found that the
supermassive black hole was
probably a little bit on the small side
for supermassive black holes probably
only about a million times
the mass of the sun you know compare
that to m87s black hole which is like
four billion times
the mass of the sun you know you're a
thousand times smaller here and the star
that got ripped apart by this black hole
probably around about the same size as
the sun so a fairly average
system astronomically speaking but what
was really special about this tidal
disruption event was that the
astronomers detected an
outflow from the region around the black
hole so not the black hole itself
because nothing can escape a black hole
but literally an outgassing or throwing
out of material
from this region around the black hole
as this star
got torn apart and pulled in to the
black hole the way they
spotted this was that they actually
spotted the fact that some of the
emission of light from this material
that was going very hot
had been blue shifted i
it was coming towards us it was being
thrown
out from the regions around the black
hole at a speed of 10
000 kilometers a second
that's pretty fast so what these
researchers actually found was that the
majority of light that they detected was
actually coming from that material that
was being
outflowed at those huge speeds rather
than the material that had reached those
huge speeds spiraling around the black
hole
was about to be eaten by it which means
that actually
when that star came in the majority of
its material ended up being thrown back
out again
rather than being eaten by the black
hole that might sound strange to some
because we think of black holes as just
these endless hoovers that can just take
in as much material as they want
but actually you've got this material
sort of jostling to
all being eaten by the black holes the
pressure builds and builds and builds
and builds it can't all be eaten at once
just like
when you pull out the plug from your
sink not all the water goes down at once
and sometimes when that pressure builds
to a certain amount
to ease that pressure what happens is
the material is
thrown back out from the accretion disk
in one of these
outflows we sometimes call them winds as
well and if you've got a very energetic
system then sometimes you also end up
getting these huge big jets that can be
funneled by
magnetic fields and all sorts so again
this feeds back into
how do black holes grow when a stock or
clump of gas gets spaghettified like
this actually the majority of it
won't get used by the black hole to grow
the majority of it will get
thrown back out into space
and so the question is you know can
black holes grow
more efficiently with lots of these
spaghettification processes
or would they grow more efficiently if
they had a constant supply of gas that
was feeding one of these accretion disks
around them and what it looks like from
this result anyway
is that in these spaghettification
scenarios
try and saying that twice as fast
forgetfication scenarios
forgettification scenarios forgetfulness
scenario is that actually not as much
mass as we thought
ends up getting accreted or eaten by the
black hole
that's it for this month's night sky
news don't forget to
head over to my instagram or my youtube
stories to check out all of that
astrobiology news in the solar system
but also i just want to acknowledge that
it has been two years
since my very first night sky news video
back in october 2018 and really two
years since i started this channel
as well i remember that video got
something like 200 views in its first
day and i was like amazed
200 a day this is incredible and you
know
look at us now look at us look at us huh
who would have thought
not me with books and plaques and
thousands of you now watching i still
kind of can't quite wrap my head around
it as i sit here alone in my spare
bedroom talking to nobody is what it
feels like
but i guess what i can believe is just
that there are other people out there
that just
love this stuff as much as i do and that
is really what makes me smile and i just
want to say
a massive massive thank you to all of
you from the bottom of my heart
for for being here for commenting for
just engaging in chat about space
because at the end of the day that's
what i love
love to do so thank you
so fluffy today
to any specific story so without further
further ado
featheredu on venus last month which was
in
my previous night sky new episode so
night sky new episode a short time scale
astronomically speaking anyway of only a
couple
of decades years one decade less than a
decade couple years
you're created by the black hole too
like the first combo material
there
[Music]
and i detected those x-rays from the
intergalactical
planet i love it i should pitch mcfly
now tonight for a parody song